Feature revamp DI chapter (#1867)
TYPO3-Documentation/TYPO3CMS-Reference-CoreApi: Documentation/ApiOverview/DependencyInjection/Index.rst

is a pattern used to delegate the task of resolving class dependencies away from a consumer
towards the underlying framework.

Back to history: After :php:`makeInstance()` has been around for quite a while and lacked an
implementation of dependency injection, extbase appeared in 2009. Extbase brought a first container
and dependency injection solution, it's main interface being the extbase :php:`ObjectManager`.
The extbase object manager has been widely used for a long time, but suffered from some
issues younger approaches don't face. One of the main drawbacks of extbase object manager
is the fact that it's based on runtime reflection: Whenever an object is to be instantiated,
the object manager scans the class for needed injections and prepares dependencies to be
injected. This process is quite slow though mitigated by various caches. And these also
come with costs. In the end, these issues have been the main reason the object manager
was never established as a main core concept but only lived in extbase scope.

The object lifecycle and dependency injection solution based on Symfony DI has been

> implemented with TYPO3 core v10 and is a general core concept: Next to the native

Author: 'added in TYPO3v10' or 'added to TYPO3v10'?

> implemented with TYPO3 core v10 and is a general core concept: Next to the native

Reviewer: Either _in_ or _with_. Otherwise it sounds like it's available only in that single version.

dependency injection, it is also wired into :php:`makeInstance()` as a long living
backwards compatibility solution, and it fully substitutes the extbase object manager. In
contrast to the extbase solution, Symfony based object management does *not* have the
overhead of
expensive runtime calculations. Instead it is an instance wide build-time solution: When
TYPO3 bootstraps, all object creation details of all classes are read from
a single cache file just once, and afterwards no expensive calculation is required
for actual creation.

Symfony based DI was implemented in TYPO3 v10 and usage of the extbase
ObjectManager was discouraged. With TYPO3 v11 the core doesn't use the
ObjectManager any more. It is actively deprecated in v11 and thus leads to
'deprecation' level log entries.

With TYPO3 v12 the extbase ObjectManager is actually gone. Making use of
Symfony DI integration still continues. There
are still various places in the core to be improved. Further streamlining will
be done over time. For instance, the final fate of makeInstance()

> and the SingletonInterface has not fully been decided on yet. Various

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the :php:`SingletonInterface` has not fully been decided on yet. Various
```

tasks remain to be solved in younger TYPO3 developments to further improve the
*object lifecycle management* provided by the core.

Build-time caches
=================

To get a basic understanding of the core's lifecycle management it is helpful to
get a rough insight on the main construct. As already mentioned, *object lifecycle
management* is conceptualized as steps to take place at *build-time*.
It is done very early and only once during the TYPO3
bootstrap process. All calculated
information is written to a special cache that can not be reconfigured and is available
early. On subsequent requests the cache file is loaded.
Extensions can not mess with the construct if they adhere to the core API.

Besides being created early, the state of the container is independent and
exactly the same in *frontend*, *backend* and *CLI scope*. The same container instance may
even be used for multiple requests. This is becoming more and more important nowadays with the
core being able to execute sub requests. The only exception to this is the
*install tool*: It uses a more basic container that "cannot fail". This difference

> is not important for extension developers however since they can't hook into the install tool

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is not important for extension developers however since they can't hook into the Install Tool
```

at those places anyways.

The Symfony container implementation is usually configured to actively scan the
extension classes for needed injections. All it takes are just a couple
of lines within file :file:`Services.yaml`. This should be done within all extensions that

> contain PHP classes and it is the fundamental setup we will outline in the following.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
contain PHP classes and it is the fundamental setup we will outline in the following sections.
```

For developers, it is important to understand that dealing with Symfony DI is
an *early core bootstrap* thing. The system will fail upon misconfiguration, so
frontend and backend may be unreachable.

.. attention::

   Errors in the DI cache may block frontend and backend!

   The DI cache does not heal by itself but needs to be cleared manually!

The container cache entry (at the time of this writing) *is not* deleted when a
backend admin user clicks "Clear all cache" in the backend top toolbar. The only
way to force a DI recalculation is using the "Admin tools" -> "Maintenance" -> "Flush Caches"
button of the backend embedded install tool or the standalone install tool itself. This
means: Whenever core or an extension fiddles with DI (or more general "Container") configuration,
this cache has to be manually emptied for a running instance by clicking this button.
The backend extension manager however *does* empty the cache automatically when loading or unloading extensions.
Another way to quickly drop this cache during development is to remove all

> :file:`var/cache/code/di/*` files, which reside in :file:`typo3temp/` in non-composer based

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:file:`var/cache/code/di/*` files, which reside in :file:`typo3temp/` in Legacy Mode
```

Maybe link to the according section in the TYPO3 Composer docs?

> instances or elsewhere in composer based instances (see :ref:`Environment`). TYPO3 will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
instances or elsewhere in Composer Mode instances (see :ref:`Environment`). TYPO3 will
```

Same here?

> then recalculate the cache upon the next instance call, no matter if it's a frontend, a backend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
then recalculate the cache upon the next access, no matter if it's a frontend, a backend
```

or a CLI request.

The main takeaway is: When a developer fiddles with container configuration,
the cache needs to be manually cleared. And if some configuration issue slipped in,
which made the container or DI calculation fail, the system does *not* heal itself and

> needs both a fix of the configuration plus probably a cache removal. The standalone install
> tool however should *always* work, even if the backend breaks down, so the "Flush caches"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
needs both a fix of the configuration plus probably a cache removal. The standalone Install
Tool however should *always* work, even if the backend breaks down, so the "Flush caches"
```

button is always reachable. Note that *if* the container calculation fails, the
:file:`var/log/typo3_*` files contain the exception with backtrace!

Important terms
===============

We will continue to use a couple of technical terms in this chapter, so let's quickly
define them to align. Some of them are not precisely used in our world, for
instance some Java devs may stumble upon "our" understanding of a prototype.

> In general, we're still somehow using them in the right direction ;)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Prototype
   The broad understanding of a *prototype* within the TYPO3 community is

>    that it's simply an object that is created a-new every time. Basically the direct

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   that it's simply an object that is created anew every time. Basically the direct
```

   opposite of a *singleton*. In fact, the prototype pattern describes a base object that
   is created once, so :php:`__construct()` is called to set it up, after that it is
   cloned each time one wants to have a new instance of it. The community isn't well aware
   of that, and the core provides no "correct" prototype API, so the word *prototype* is

>    often misused for an object that is always created a-new when the framework is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   often misused for an object that is always created anew when the framework is
```

   asked to create one.

Singleton

>    That's pretty clear. A *singleton* is an object that is instantiated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   A *singleton* is an object that is instantiated
```

>    exactly once within one process. If an instance is requested and the object has been

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   exactly once within one request. If an instance is requested and the object has been
```

>    created already once, the same instance is returned. Codewise, this is sometimes done by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   created once already, the same instance is returned. Codewise, this is sometimes done by
```

   implementing a static :php:`getInstance()` method that parks the instance in a property.
   In TYPO3, this can also be achieved by implementing the :php:`SingletonInterface`,
   where :php:`makeInstance()` then stores the object internally. Within containers, this can be done

>    by declaring the object :yaml:`shared: true`, which is usually the default. We'll come back to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   by declaring the object as shared (:yaml:`shared: true`), which is the default. We'll come back to
```

   details later. Singletons *must not* have state - they must act the same way each time

>    they're used, no matter where, how often or when they've been used before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   they're used, no matter where, how often or when they've been used before. Otherwise the behavior of a singleton
   object is undefined and will lead to obscure errors.
```

Service
   This is another "not by the book" definition. We use the understanding
   "What is a service?" from Symfony: In Symfony, everything that is instantiated through
   the service container (both directly via :php:`$container->get()` and indirectly via DI)
   *is a service*. These are many things - for instance controllers are services, as well as

>    - non static - utilities, repositories and obvious classes like mailers and similar. It

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - non static - utilities, repositories and obvious classes like mailers and similar. To make it clear:
   not only classes named with a :php:`*Service` suffix are services but basically anything. It
```

Author: I want to avoid the emotional touch ("rechthaberisch") of 'To make it clear:'

Reviewer: Fine with me. We just need to be sure to mention that the term _service_ people are used to has a different meaning in DI.

   does not matter much if those services are stateless or not. Controllers, for instance,
   are usually *not* stateless. ((this is just a configuration detail from this point of view.))

>    Note the TYPO3 core does not strictly follow this in all casesyet, but strives

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Note the TYPO3 core does not strictly follow this in all cases yet, but strives
```

   to get this more clean over time.

Data object
  Data objects are the opposite of services. They are *not* available

>   through service containers. Predicate :php:`$container->has()` returns false and they can not be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  through service containers. Here calling :php:`$container->has()` returns :php:`false` and they can not be
```

  injected. They are instantiated either with :php:`new()` or :php:`GeneralUtility::makeInstance()`.

>   Models are a typical example of data objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Domain models or DTO are a typical example of data objects.
```

  *Note:* *Data objects* are *not* "service container aware"
  and do not support DI. Although the TYPO3 core does not strictly follow this rule in all cases
  until now the ambition is to get this done over time.

.. _supported-ways-of-dependency-injection:
.. _Using-DI:

Using DI
========

Now that we have a general understanding of what a service and what a data
object is, let's turn to usages of services. We will mostly use examples for
this.

*The general rule is:* Whenever your class has a service dependency to another class,
one of the following solutions should be used.

When to use Dependency Injection in TYPO3
-----------------------------------------

Class dependencies to services should be injected via constructor injection or
setter methods. Where possible, Symfony dependency injection should be used for
all cases where DI is required.

> Non-service "data objects" like Extbase model instances or DTOs should

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Non-service "data objects" like Extbase domain model instances or DTOs should
```

be instantiated via :php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Core\Utility\GeneralUtility::makeInstance()`
if they are non-final and support XCLASSing. For final classes without

> dependencies the `new` keyword can be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dependencies plain instantiation via the `new` keyword must be used.
```

.. _Constructor-injection:

Constructor injection
---------------------

Assume we're writing a controller that renders a list of users. Those users are

> found using a UserRepository, so the repository service is a direct dependency of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
found using a custom :php:`UserRepository`, so the repository service is a direct dependency of the
```

controller service. A typical constructor dependency injection to resolve the
dependency by the framework looks like this:

.. code-block:: php

   namespace MyVendor\MyExtension\Controller;

   use MyVendor\MyExtension\Repository\UserRepository;

>    class UserController

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   final class UserController
```

   {

>       protected UserRepository $userRepository;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        private UserRepository $userRepository;
```

>       public function __construct(UserRepository $userRepository)
>       {
>          $this->userRepository = $userRepository;
>       }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        public function __construct(UserRepository $userRepository)
        {
             $this->userRepository = $userRepository;
        }
```

   }

> ((This is straight and easy DI: The controller class is configured to be autowired
> as Symfony DI service container entry (more on that below), Symfony container finds a
> dependency to :php:`UserRepository` when scanning :php:`__construct()` and then knows that
> :php:`UserController` needs an instance of the repository service when the controller
> service is instantiated.)) ← ToDo: Improve understandability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here the Symfony container sees a dependency to :php:`UserRepository` when scanning :php:`__construct()`
of the :php:`UserController`. Since autowiring is enabled by default (more on that below), an instance of the
:php:`UserRepository` is created and provided when the controller is created.
```

.. _Method-injection:

Method injection
----------------

A second way to get services injected is by using :php:`inject*()` methods:

.. code-block:: php

   namespace MyVendor\MyExtension\Controller;

   use MyVendor\MyExtension\Repository\UserRepository;

>    class UserController
>    {
>       protected ?UserRepository $userRepository = null;
> 
>       public function injectUserRepository(UserRepository $userRepository)
>       {
>          $this->userRepository = $userRepository;
>       }
>    }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   final class UserController
   {
        private ?UserRepository $userRepository = null;

        public function injectUserRepository(UserRepository $userRepository)
        {
            $this->userRepository = $userRepository;
        }
   }
```

> This ends up with the exactly the same result as above: The controller instance has

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ends up with the basically the same result as above: The controller instance has
```

an object of type :php:`UserRepository` in class property :php:`$userRepository`.

> This inject* way came from extbase and TYPO3 core implemented it in addition to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The injection via methods was introduced by Extbase and TYPO3 core implemented it in addition to
```

the default Symfony constructor injection. Why did we do that, you may ask? Both

> strategies have subtle differences: First, when using inject* methods, the type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
strategies have subtle differences: First, when using :php:`inject*()` methods, the type
```

hinted class property needs to be nullable, otherwise PHP >= 7.4 throws a warning

> since the instance is not set during :php:`__construct()`. But that's just a
> language detail. More important is an abstraction scenario. Consider this case:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
since the instance is not set during :php:`__construct()`. But that's just an
implementation detail. More important is an abstraction scenario. Consider this case:
```

.. code-block:: php

   namespace MyVendor\MyExtension\Controller;

   use MyVendor\MyExtension\Repository\UserRepository;
   use MyVendor\MyExtension\Logger\Logger;

>    abstract class AbstractController
>    {
>       protected ?Logger $logger = null;
> 
>       public function injectLogger(Logger $logger)
>       {
>          $this->logger = $logger;
>       }
>    }
> 
>    class UserController extends AbstractController
>    {
>       protected UserRepository $userRepository;
> 
>       public function __construct(UserRepository $userRepository)
>       {
>          $this->userRepository = $userRepository;
>       }
>    }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   abstract class AbstractController
   {
        protected ?Logger $logger = null;

        public function injectLogger(Logger $logger)
        {
            $this->logger = $logger;
        }
   }

   final class UserController extends AbstractController
   {
        private UserRepository $userRepository;

        public function __construct(UserRepository $userRepository)
        {
            $this->userRepository = $userRepository;
        }
   }
```

> We have an abstract service with a dependency plus a service that extends

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have an abstract constroller service with a dependency plus a controller service that extends
```

the abstract and has further dependencies.

Now assume the abstract class is provided by TYPO3 core and the consuming class
is provided by an extension. If the abstract class would use constructor injection,

> the consuming class would need to know the dependencies of the abstract, add it's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the consuming class would need to know the dependencies of the abstract, add its
```

own dependency to the constructor, and then call :php:`parent::__construct($logger)` to
satisfy the dependency of the abstract. This would hardcode all dependencies
of the abstract into extending classes. If later the abstract is changed and
another dependency is added to the constructor, this would break consuming
classes since they did not know that.

*Differently put:* When core classes "pollute" :php:`__construct()` with dependencies,
the core can not add dependencies without being breaking. This is the reason why

> for example the extbase :php:`AbstractController` uses inject* methods for its

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for example the extbase :php:`AbstractController` uses :php:`inject*()` methods for its
```

dependencies: Extending classes can then use constructor injection, do not need
to call :php:`parent::__construct()`, and the core is free to change dependencies of
the abstract.

In general, when the core provides abstract classes that are expected to be

> extended by extensions, the abstract class should use inject* methods instead of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
extended by extensions, the abstract class should use :php:`inject*()` methods instead of
```

constructor injection. Extensions of course can follow this idea in similar
scenarios.

This construct has some further implications: Abstract classes should
think about making their dependency properties :php:`private`, so extending classes
can not rely on them. Furthermore, classes that should *not* be extended by extensions
are free to use constructor injection and *should* be marked :php:`final`, making
sure they can't be extended to allow internal changes.

As a last note on method injection, there is another way to do it: It is possible
to use a :php:`setFooDependency()` method if it has the annotation :php:`@required`.
This second way of method injection however is not used within the TYPO3
framework, should be avoided in general, and is just mentioned here for completeness.

.. _interface-injection:

Interface injection
-------------------

> Apart from constructor injection and inject*() method injection, there is another

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apart from constructor injection and :php:`inject*()` method injection, there is another
```

useful dependency injection scenario. Look at this example:

.. code-block:: php

   namespace MyVendor\MyExtension\Controller;

   use MyVendor\MyExtension\Logger\LoggerInterface;

>    class UserController extends AbstractController
>    {
>       protected LoggerInterface $logger;
> 
>       public function __construct(LoggerInterface $logger)
>       {
>          $this->logger = $logger;
>       }
>    }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   final class UserController extends AbstractController
   {
        protected LoggerInterface $logger;

        public function __construct(LoggerInterface $logger)
        {
            $this->logger = $logger;
        }
   }
```

See the difference? We're requesting the injection of an interface and not a class!
It works for both constructor and method injection. It forces the service container
to look up which specific class is configured as implementation of the interface and

> inject and instance of it. This is the true heart of dependency injection: A consuming

Reviewer: ```suggestion
inject an instance of it. This is the true heart of dependency injection: A consuming
```

class no longer codes on a specific implementation, but on the signature of the interface.
The framework makes sure something is injected that satisfies the interface,
the consuming class does not care, it just knows about the interface methods. An
instance administrator can decide to configure the framework to inject some
different implementation than the default, and that's fully transparent
for consuming classes.

Using container->get()
======================

[WIP] Service containers provide two methods to obtain objects, first via :php:`$container->get()`,
and via DI. This is only available for services itself: Classes that are registered
as a service via configuration can use injection or :php:`$container->get()`. DI is

> supported in two ways: As constructor injection, and as inject*() method injection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
supported in two ways: As constructor injection, and as :php:`inject*()` method injection.
```

They lead to the same result, but have subtle differences. More on that later.

In general, services should use DI (constructor or method injection) to obtain dependencies.
This is what you'll most often find when looking at core implementations. However, it
is also possible to *get the container injected* and then use :php:`$container->get()`

> to instantiate services. This is useful for factory-like services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to instantiate services. This is useful for factory-like services where the exact name of classes is determined at runtime.
```

       resource: '../Classes/*'
       exclude: '../Classes/Domain/Model/*'

autowire
   :yaml:`autowire: true` instructs the dependency injection component
   to calculate the required dependencies from type declarations. This works for constructor

>    and inject methods. The calculation yields to a service initialization recipe

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   and :php:`inject*()` methods. The calculation generates some service initialization code
```

>    which is cached in php code in the TYPO3 Core cache.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   which is cached in the TYPO3 Core cache.
```

   **Attention:**
   An extension doesn't need to use autowiring, it is free to manually
   wire dependencies in the service configuration file.

autoconfigure
   It is suggested to enable :yaml:`autoconfigure: true` as this will automatically
   add Symfony service tags based on implemented interfaces or base classes.
   For example autoconfiguration ensures that classes which implement

>    :php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Core\SingletonInterface` will be publicly available from the
>    Symfony container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Core\SingletonInterface` will be publicly available from the
   Symfony container and marked as shared (:yaml:`shared: true`).
```

set in extensions. This settings controls which services are available
through the dependency injection container which is used internally by
:php:`GeneralUtility::makeInstance()`.
However some classes that need to be public will be marked public automatically
due to :yaml:`autoconfigure: true`.
These classes include singletons, because they need to be shared with code that uses
:php:`GeneralUtility::makeInstance()` and Extbase controllers.

.. index:: Dependency injection; Public
.. _knowing-what-to-make-public:
.. _What-to-make-public:

What to make public
-------------------

Instances of :php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Core\SingletonInterface` and Extbase controllers are

> marked public by default. Additionally some classes cannot be private as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
automatically marked as public. Some further classes must be marked as public, too.
```

As the Symfony documentation `Public and private services
<https://symfony.com/doc/current/service_container/alias_private.html>`__ puts
it:

   Simply said: A service can be marked as private if you do not want to access
   it directly from your code.

   -- `Symfony documentation <https://symfony.com/doc/current/service_container/alias_private.html>`__

Direct access includes instantiation via :php:`GeneralUtility::makeInstance()` with constructor arguments.

> This means every class that needs dependency injection and is retrieved directly, like when
> using :php:`GeneralUtility::makeInstance()`, *must* be marked as public.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means every class that is retrieved directly using :php:`GeneralUtility::makeInstance()` *and* needs dependency injection, *must* be marked as public.
```
